---
title: REST - Representational State Transfer
path: /rest-tldr
date: 2020-07-08
summary: Usually, when people speak about REST APIs they mean a web API that uses the HTTP request methods (POST, GET, PUT, DELETE, etc.) to modify or access the state of a resource.
tags: ["JavaScript", "REST", "Backend"]
---

## TLDR

Usually, when people speak about REST APIs they mean a web API that uses
the HTTP request methods (POST, GET, PUT, DELETE, etc.) to modify or access the
state of a resource.

Individual resources are identified using URIs.

For example, a list of all users:

```code
https://webservice.com/api/users
```

and the user with the id 3049485:

```code
https://webservice.com/api/users/3049485
```

Now with REST you usually use one of the HTTP methods on the resource you want to modify/access.

For example, you could use the DELETE request method somewhere in your client to delete the individual user like this:

```javascript
const res = await axios({
  method: "delete",
  url: `api/user/3049485`,
});
```

That's it for the TLDR. If you want a more in-depth explanation of REST
keep reading below.

## REST

REST is an acronym for **RE**presentational **S**tate **T**ransfer.

REST is a software architectural style that defines a set of
rules that can be used for designing web APIs.

When an API follows the six constraints that define REST, then this API
can be called **RESTful**.

Here are the six rules:

## 1. Client-server architecture

Client and Server should be separated. By keeping the user interface and the backend
separated, we improve the portability of the user interface across multiple platforms and improve scalability by simplifying the server components.

## 2. Stateless

Communication must be stateless. This means that the server does not
store any session data. For example, the server **does not know** if a user
is logged in. It **does not know** what the last request of a user was.

The server only knows the information that is contained
in the current request.

## 3. Cache

Every response must be labeled as cacheable or non-cacheable. If a response
is cacheable, then a client cache is given the right to reuse that response laster.

## 4. Uniform Interface

The central feature that distinguishes REST architectural style from other
network-based styles is its emphasis on a uniform interface between components.

### Resource identification in requests

Individual resources are identified in requests using URI's.

For example, a list of all users:

```code
https://webservice.com/api/users
```

and the user with the id 3049485:

```code
https://webservice.com/api/users/3049485
```

In this example, the resource **user** is identified with the id
**3049485** in the request.

### Resource manipulation through representations

When a client gets the current state of a resource (representation) it has enough
information to modify or delete the resource.

For example, you get the user from the API like this:

```code
https://webservice.com/api/users/3049485
```

This should now give you all the information to modify or delete the user.
In this case, the API should return all the information about the user.

```json
{
  "id": "3049485",
  "type": "user",
  "username": "luke123",
  "age": "22",
  "gender": "male"
}
```

### Self-descriptive messages

A self-descriptive message is one that contains all
the information that the recipient needs to understand it.

In case of a web API, the API returns the Media-Type in the Response
Header

```code
Content-Type: application/json
```

Now the client knows it must parse the JSON that gets returned from the API.

### Hypermedia as the engine of application state (HATEOAS)

This is where most web APIs fail to follow the constraints of REST.
According to this constraint, the API should behave similarly to a website.

The API should return Links that would allow a REST client to be able to
dynamically discover all the available resources it needs.

For example, you get the user from the API like this:

```code
https://webservice.com/api/users/3049485
```

The API should then provide you with links for all other actions on that resource.

```json
{
  "username": "luke123",
  "age": "22",
  "gender": "male",
  "links": {
    "friends": "/users/3049485/friends",
    "wife": "/users/3049485/wife"
  }
}
```

Now let's say luke does not have friends - I know it's sad - what would the
response then look like?

```json
{
  "username": "luke123",
  "age": "22",
  "gender": "male",
  "links": {
    "wife": "/users/3049485/wife"
  }
}
```

The link to "friends" is missing because what actions wich are possible varies
on the state of the resource.

Also, JSON does not support any links out of the box, and we need
to inform the client otherwise - e.g. with documentation - how to use the links.

According to the REST definition, this feature should be defined in the media type itself,
and not by documentation.

You can see that 99% of APIs are not following this constraint and are therefore
not REST APIs according to the definition of Roy Fielding.

You could call these APIs RESTish or REST without HATEOAS.
